PEP: 832
Title: Virtual environment discovery
Author: Brett Cannon <brett@python.org>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/106998
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 19-Jan-2026
Python-Version: 3.15
Post-History: `15-Apr-2026 <https://discuss.python.org/t/106998>`__
              `23-Apr-2026 <https://discuss.python.org/t/106998/52>`__


Abstract
========

This PEP sets out to help make the discovery of a project's existing
environments easier. By providing a default location to look for a virtual
environment as already supported by most tools as well as an easy way for
workflow tools to list any other environments (virtual or not), tools will have
a way to find any and all existing environments for a project.


Motivation
==========

Imagine you are on your Mac laptop and you double-click your desktop shortcut
to launch Emacs (feel free to substitute "Mac" and "Emacs" with your preferred
OS and editor, respectively). You open the directory for your project in Emacs.
Now, how is Emacs (or any other tool for that matter) supposed to know where
the environments for your project are? There's no possible detection of an
activated virtual environment via the ``VIRTUAL_ENV`` environment variable
as you didn't launch from a terminal. You potentially could scan all
subdirectories for a :file:`pyvenv.cfg` file to find a virtual environment, but
that assumes the virtual environments are kept locally with the project and
that there is only one of them and not several to ambiguously choose from.
As well, not all projects use virtual environments and may use a different
project isolation mechanism like conda environments.

What are tools like code editors, which need access to the environments being
used to provide functionality like auto-complete, to do when there is currently
no standardized way to tell anyone where any environments are? Currently,
tools like editors have to hard-code a search algorithm for every tool that
they choose to support. As well, they can document any conventions they
support, but that assumes you or the tool you use to manage your environments
follow those conventions which by being a convention are not written down
anywhere.

And this is not a hypothetical issue. The author of this PEP was the dev
manager for Python support in VS Code for 7 years and saw firsthand the
user struggles and constant feature requests for finding one's environments for
a project.

This issue is also not restricted to code editors. Other tools have a need to
access a project's environment to know what is installed. One example is
type checkers which need access to the packages that are installed to
appropriately gather type annotations for 3rd-party code in order to type check
the user's code.

The goal of this PEP is to provide a specification for tools which
create/manage environments a way to tell other tools where the environments for
a project are. And in the case of a project which has multiple environments,
this PEP is meant to allow for specifying the default environment to use so
users are not forced to make a choice of environment if one does not want to
make such a decision (e.g. at first launch of their code editor).

Please note this PEP neither condones nor discourages having multiple
environments for a single project; it is neutral as to whether having a single
environment or multiple ones is good or bad. It also does not condone one
environment type over another.

Specification
=============

This PEP does not define what the "root of a project" means, but the assumption
is it is the directory one would open in their code editor to work on a
project's code. This could be the directory where the project's
:file:`pyproject.toml` lives, or potentially the top directory of a monorepo.

The virtual environment for a project MAY be a path named :file:`.venv`
(i.e. :file:`.venv/pyvenv.cfg` will exist which can be used to detect the
existence of a virtual environment) in the root of the project. This PEP makes
no judgment whether :file:`.venv` is a physical or logical path to a directory
containing a virtual environment, nor whether logical paths should be resolved
to their physical equivalent before use.

The root of a project MAY have a :file:`.python-envs` file. This file acts as a
listing of all known environments for the project (sans :file:`.venv`; how that
and :file:`.python-envs` work together will be covered later). The
:file:`.python-envs` MUST be encoded using UTF-8. Each line of the file
represents an environment that is usable by the project. A trailing newline of
either ``\n`` or ``\r\n`` is allowed and MUST be ignored.

Lines in a :file:`.python-envs` file MAY be paths to an environment. Paths MAY
be relative, and if they are they are relative they MUST be relative to the
:file:`.python-envs` file. IF a path is for a virtual environment, THEN the
path MUST be to the directory of the virtual environment (i.e. the directory
containing the :file:`pyvenv.cfg` file). A line MAY represent any type of an
environment. Tools reading a :file:`.python-envs` MAY choose what sort of
environments they support and thus MAY ignore any lines they do not
understand. There are NO other restrictions on how environments are represented
or what type of environment is in a :file:`.python-envs` file.

Duplicate lines MAY be in the file. Listing the same environment multiple times
does NOT carry any meaning. Any tool MAY remove duplicates at any point, but
UNLESS the last/default environment is being actively changed then that last
entry MUST be retained.

The last environment listed in a :file:`.python-envs` file MUST be considered
the default environment when a default environment is desired. IF a tool does
not support the last environment listed THEN the tool MUST either ask the user
which environment to use OR error out.

IF both a virtual environment in a :file:`.venv` path and a
:file:`.python-envs` file exist side-by-side, THEN the :file:`.venv` path
MUST be implicitly considered the last line in the :file:`.python-envs` file.
This also means the :file:`.venv` virtual environment is considered the default
virtual environment.

With regard to committing a :file:`.python-envs` file to version control, it
MAY be done when the location of the environment(s) is considered static
to a project once it is set up. For instance, some projects that use tox_ have
a "dev" environment defined in their configuration that ends up at
``.tox/dev``. Setting a :file:`.python-envs` file to point to that virtual
environment and checking in the file is reasonable. The same goes for a project
that is only worked on within a container where the location of the
environment is controlled and thus static on the file system. The guidance of
NOT committing your actual virtual environment to version control is unchanged
by this PEP.


Rationale
=========

Explicitly supporting :file:`.venv` is to codify what's already a convention:

- `Poetry <https://python-poetry.org/docs/configuration#virtualenvsin-project>`__
  will detect a virtual environment in such a location,
- `PDM <https://pdm-project.org/en/latest/usage/venv/#virtualenv-auto-creation>`__
  creates virtual environments there already
- `uv <https://docs.astral.sh/uv/concepts/projects/layout/#the-project-environment>`__
  creates environments there already
- `Hatch can support <https://hatch.pypa.io/latest/blog/2022/10/08/hatch-v160/#virtual-environment-location>`__
  a virtual environment there)
- `VS Code <https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/python/environments#_creating-environments>`__
   will select it automatically, while still allowing configuration
- `PyCharm <https://www.jetbrains.com/help/pycharm/creating-virtual-environment.html#env-requirements>`__
   will use it
- `GitHub <https://github.com/github/gitignore/blob/main/Python.gitignore>`__
  has a default :file:`.gitignore` which ignores :file:`.venv`
- `GitLab <https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/gitlab/-/blob/master/vendor/gitignore/Python.gitignore>`__
  has a default :file:`.gitignore` which ignores :file:`.venv`
- `Codeberg <https://codeberg.org/forgejo/forgejo/src/branch/forgejo/options/gitignore/Python>`__
  has a default :file:`.gitignore` which ignores :file:`.venv`

But not every person or tool wants to keep an environment in the project or
even use the :file:`.venv` name. In those situations, you need _some_ way
to tell other tools where to find the environments. That's the purpose of the
:file:`.python-envs` file. The file itself is hidden as it isn't a critical
aspect of the project (environments themselves can be viewed as implementation
details). The file name was chosen to make sure it didn't clash with any other
tool using the same name while still being self-descriptive.

The :file:`.python-envs` file is specifically agnostic when it comes to what
type of environment can be represented. This helps future-proof the file for
unforseen, future environments. As well, leaving the representation as loose as
being what a single line of a file can represent helps with that
representation (which can include alternative representations for virtual
environments, e.g. connecting over SSH). It does mean, though, that tools
SHOULD check the line for appropriate use (e.g. make sure the environment
location is legitimate before passing it to ``subprocess.run()``).

The file format is simple to allow for easy manipulation. Having a
line-delimited file format makes it easy to append a line to a
:file:`.python-envs` file via the terminal, e.g.:

- ``echo "<path>" >> .python-envs``
- ``Add-Content .python-envs "<path>"``
- ``python3 -c "import sys; p=sys.argv[1]; open('.python-envs', 'a').write(p)" "<path>"``

To make appending as simple as a process as possible, duplicate lines are
allowed to occur in :file:`.python-envs`. This alleviates having to check the
file before appending. This is also why a trailing newline is allowed in the
file.

The file format is also simple to avoid duplicating information that the
environment already contains. For instance, it has been suggested to record a
name for environments, but e.g. virtual environments have the prompt recorded
in :file:`pyvenv.cfg`, to it doesn't need to be listed separate from the
environment where it may become stale.

This is also why the last line is the default environment: the expectation is
people will be adding the environment they want to use and not simply recording
an available environment. This all tries to make what is expected to be the
most common action be the easiest action.

Having :file:`.venv` represent the last, and thus default, environment in a
:file:`.python-envs` file is for practical reasons. Tools that predate this
PEP may use the :file:`.venv` location, and so this is a
backwards-compatibility consideration. And if a user is using such a tool that
uses :file:`.venv` then they likely already considered that virtual environment
the default.


Project Support for this PEP
============================

Speaking to various tool maintainers about this PEP:

.. note::
   Any tool without a link to an expression of (no) support gave that
   information privately, but with permission to state publicly.

- Supports

  1. VS Code


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

For the virtual environment location aspect of this PEP, there is no backwards
compatibility concern as :file:`.venv` is in this PEP specifically for
backwards compatibility.

As for :file:`.python-envs`, that file name is not known to be in use. The
biggest backwards compatibility concern is a tool producing it and it not
being used as expected. After that is the file not being ignored by version
control upfront.


Security Implications
=====================

Not checking the contents of a potentially malicious :file:`.venv` file and
passing it to a shell process (e.g. ``subprocess.run(..., shell=True)``) would
be a serious security concern. This is why this PEP says tools MUST make sure
the path is valid before using it.

Setting a :file:`.venv` file to a path that isn't a virtual environment is only
a concern if the arguments the user provided to the executable were also a
concern. That would require the user to craft appropriate arguments
on top of using the malicious :file:`.venv` file.


How to Teach This
=================

For new users, they can be told that ``python -m venv`` creates a virtual
environment in :file:`.venv`, and that any other tool that creates a virtual
environment on their behalf can do the same.

For experienced users, they should be taught the default location for a
project's virtual environment is at the root of the project in :file:`.venv`.
If the currently active virtual environment lives elsewhere, a :file:`.venv`
file will be there to tell them where to find the virtual environment.


Reference Implementation
========================

The proposed code changes to :mod:`venv` can be found at
https://github.com/brettcannon/cpython/tree/venv-location-pep. A diff showing
the changes can be seen at
https://github.com/brettcannon/cpython/compare/main...brettcannon:cpython:venv-location-pep.


Rejected Ideas
==============

Use a name other than ``.venv``
-------------------------------

Some people either don't like that ``.venv`` is hidden by some tools by
default thanks to the leading ``.``, or don't like ``venv`` as an
abbreviation. Since there doesn't seem to be a clear consensus on an
alternative, a different name doesn't fundamentally change any semantics,
existing tools seem to already support ``.venv``, one can still use a different
name for an environment thanks to redirect file support as proposed by this
PEP, and the author of this PEP prefers the name, ``.venv`` was chosen.
Discussing alternative names was viewed as bikeshedding.


Open Issues
===========

List all known virtual environments in the redirect file
--------------------------------------------------------

While the redirect file format is designed for future usage, this PEP could
choose to just use that space now instead of in some future PEP. The extra data
in the file could record other virtual environments that the project has.
Optionally, the path could be separated from a labelled name by a ``\t``. The
default virtual environment would be allowed to be listed in the labelled
section if an explicit label was desired. Another option would to record such
data in a JSON/JSONL trailer in the file.


Acknowledgements
================

Thanks to everyone who participated in an earlier discussion on this topic at
https://discuss.python.org/t/22922/. Thanks to Cary Hawkins of Hatch,
Randy Döring of Poetry, Frost Ming of PDM, Bernát Gábor of virtualenv & tox,
Vinay Sajip of venv, and Zanie Blue of uv for feedback on the initial draft of
this PEP.

Change History
==============

- 23-Apr-2026

  - Add PyCharm and library-skills support
  - Have redirect files read up to the first newline
  - Clarify there is no opinion to having multiple virtual environments
  - Explicitly use the code editor example for the motivation
  - Have ``venv.executable()`` be configurable for the virtual environment
    name
  - Clarify symlinks are not to be treated in any special way
  - Move the Rationale after the Specification and simplify the latter by
    moving details to the former
  - Loosened things involving "MAY", "SHOULD", and "NOT" so tools are not
    required to do anything beyond how they interpret a redirect file


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.


.. _tox: https://tox.wiki/
